There, Jackie, is that correct?
Yes. Kilda. Kilda. Welcome.
Thank you so much for joining us.
You're our first sub submitter this morning,
and what's a, what's a very full day of submission,
so we're excited to hear from you.
We do have a copy of your written, uh, submission
that we have the opportunity to look at.
Uh, and we've got 10 minutes today to hear from you.
So welcome. You're welcome to use all of that time
or save some time for questions from members at the end,
if there are any over to you. Sure.
Thank you.
Child Rights Advocacy
and Research Director for Save the Children.
Thank you for the opportunity
to share our oral submission on the
emergency management system.
Bill number two,
and Save the Children has more than 100 years
of experience in responding to emergencies
with a specific focus on the rights needs
and wellbeing of children.
We were founded in 1919 in response to the P
of Children in Europe, terribly affected by the aftermath
of World War I, and this was our first emergency response.
We have an extensive history of more than 50 years working
with the New Zealand government and ODA
and Emergency response, and primarily in overseas settings.
And some recent examples include Fiji, Vanuatu,
Solomon Islands, and Tonga,
and Principles Save the Children's supports the
Emergency Management Bill.
We are strongly supportive of the Bill's intention
to modernize and redevelop New Zealand's emergency
management system to ensure that it is fit for purpose
and can meet the reality
that Tua New Zealand is facing more frequent
and more severe weather events.
And our submission we make for key recommendations.
And the first of these is to explicitly include
and reference children as a key stakeholder group in the
bill through appointing a person with knowledge, experience,
and expertise related to children
and the emergency management coordinating executive groups.
Currently, the bill does not adequately identify
or include children as a key stakeholder group,
despite children being at greater risk during and
after an emergency event.
Sadly, nine people lost their lives in emergency events in
the east of the North Island in just January,
in January this year alone.
And of those nine three were children.
It is critical children have greater visibility
and recognition in the four key stages
of emergency management readiness,
risk reduction, response and recovery.
In clause 39 of the bill, it requires the establishment
of emergency management coordinating executive, uh, groups,
and it clearly states the requirements
of the membership group to hold expertise related
to health disability, local Maori and Iwi representation
and the needs of rural communities.
Among other requirements.
Expertise related to children is not a stated requirement.
It is the view of Save the Children.
Based on our extensive experience in the field responding to
emergencies, that expert representation
of children should be stated in the bill
as a requirement of these groups.
A second recommendation is to take a child rights approach
to emergency management al New Zealand
and amend the current bill to specifically include reference
to upholding the rights of children throughout the manage,
sorry, emergency management system.
The increasing frequency
and severity of weather related events is putting children
at risk globally.
Children are particularly vulnerable
to extreme climate related events, economic, social
and environmental shocks
and disasters, their rights to a healthy
and safe environment.
Life and survival development, health, food,
water, and sanitation.
Social protection and adequate standard of living education
and non-discrimination are increasingly hindered
by the detri detrimental effects of climate change,
including water scarcity, undernourishment,
and significant increase in frequency
and intensity of weather related emergencies.
Taking a child rights approach,
ensure children are considered
and accommodated as key as a key stakeholder group,
and the conventional rights of the child serves
as a useful framework to ensure that children's needs
and wellbeing are met during
and in the recovery phase of an emergency event.
Key components of a child rights approach include
protection, participation, provision, reunification,
and psychosocial support.
The bill should be our third recommendation is the bill
should be strengthened to give greater attention
to readiness in the emergency management system.
Currently, the bill states requirements for risk reduction
through risk identification
and management response through clarifying roles,
responsibilities and legal requirements
and recovery through transition periods
and legal exercise of powers and allocation of resources.
However, readiness is largely addressed
through planning requirements yet to be put in place.
Save the children supports recommendations
by the inquiry into the response
of the North Island severe weather offense in 2023
to strengthen readiness requirements,
particularly at the local level based on reported experience
of people in affected communities.
The inquiry found that there is an opportunity
to strengthen the critical role communities play in
emergency response, including
through ongoing public education programs.
There is also a need to significantly improve
with in CDM agencies, especially in readiness activities
and community engagement.
There is a disconnect between ceds expectations
and understandings and that of community expectations
and understandings to achieve this, the resourcing
of emergency preparedness
and education is critically needed at the community level.
Our final recommendation is
to ensure adequate resourcing led by central government
and including local government to give effect to the new fit
for purpose emergency management system Resourcing,
including exp expertise, capacity
and financial investment must be allocated
of a new emergency management system, is
to be effective in addressing the growing frequency
and severity of emergency events in al investment
and education at the community
and household level is to ensure that we are better prepared
as a nation the need for education as part
of emergency preparedness as well.
Recognize Save the Children conducts emergency preparedness
education programs around the world, including
through programs that delivered in New Zealand, the Pacific
and Asia Regions monitoring
and evaluation of emergency preparedness education programs
show that schools and communities
that engage in preparedness education are better prepared
to cope, to cope with,
and also recover from emergency events.
That concludes our submission,
and I'm happy to take any questions.
I think you're on mute.
I think you're pointing to me chair.
Um, but you're on mute, so I'll just ask my question. Um,
Sorry. Um, I just,
um, have trouble with my mouse.
Um, but yes, Fran, please ask.
Okay. Thank, thank you chair.
Um, thank you so much for your submission, Jackie.
I'm, I'm, I'm interested in the point you made around, um,
4.1, uh, around, um, making sure that there's, um, someone
with, uh, expertise like with children in these groups.
Are you talking about direct lived experience
through like youth council
or a kind of more facilitated model, like
through the children's commissioner, for example?
Well, I think the expertise will be
because these are community groups will be
sourced at the community level.
And so it could be, uh, people
who are professionals working with or for children.
So it could be somebody, uh, in the teaching sector who
who is aware of, uh, 'cause often schools
and have a quite a strong program
of emergency preparedness within the school.
Uh, it could be, um, uh, experts within the community
that put their hand up or can be identified.
I don't think we need to say it's exactly this one person.
It could be a youth group if there is a strong youth council
within the community network that could certainly, um,
provide advice and support.
And I think it's important to recognize
that children are not homogenous and that there are ages
and stages of development within children.
So if we're planning for emergencies, how are we planning
for infants to be cared for?
Infants are, are a different, um, set of circumstances
to say adolescents, uh, partic, particularly girls going
through pub puberty that might need support in that way.
And then of course, there are children that, um,
may have specific health needs, uh, like adults do,
but really, you know, children are completely reliant on
adults with their support, care
and care in particularly in the younger years.
So having expertise stated just as it's stated
for those other groups like Iwi, Maori, uh,
and also I think there's rural
and the others that I mentioned it, it's not prescriptive
to say who it will be,
but it is stated as a requirement, as part of these groups
as an, as holding that expertise.
Thank you. Thanks.
I just also had a question around, um,
kind of two questions.
The first one you might be able to answer quickly,
which is just the list
that you've got in your written submission around the, uh,
child rights approach to emergency management.
Do you think that that could be incorporated, um,
or were you imagining that that would be in the bill
or that that would be kind of in codes of practice or,
or in how, um, individual civil defense groups dealt
with particular emergencies?
Like where would you see that being kind of codified?
I think there's a place for it in both.
And even if it's, um, a smaller statement in the bill
that then, um, as it,
it becomes a requirement if it's legislated,
it's a legal requirement rather than a nice to have
or a should have, it would have great, you know,
very positive effect in those, um, codes of conduct
and in the emergency management plans that are yet
to be developed.
However, I think there's a place for both
because there's a, a possibility of missing, uh,
that requirement if there's not a reference
to upholding the rights of children or,
or that reference to take a child rights emergency
management approach somewhere.
Um, um, there's a number
of places that it could sit in the bill.
Fantastic. We are actually out
of time now, so I'll end it there.
But thank you so much for joining us, uh, this morning
and for your written submission as well.
We really appreciate your time. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Appreciate the opportunity. Kaki
Kaki. Our next
submitter is Leanne Darle,
and I think you're there, Leanne.
I am indeed. Fantastic. We've,
We've only got got five minutes with you
and I know you have a lot of expertise.
We've got a very good written submission from you.
So, um, I won't, I won't delay, but I'll hand over to you.
Thank you. And I, I, yeah, we'll mention that in a minute.
Uh, Sunday was the 15th anniversary
of the 22nd of February earthquake, 185 people died.
A hundred and 15th of them were in one building.
And I kind of wanted the committee
to think about whether the legislation
that they're considering today would've made
any sort of difference.
And I'm gonna say, sadly, don't hold your breath.
This bill doesn't cover what happened.
Uh, and, and on that occasion, it was the building act, um,
and the issuing of placards red, yellow, and, uh, white.
It is today, but on the 4th of September, 2010, shortly
after that, when the CTV building was stickered,
it was a green sticker that it received.
And the point that I'm making here is that there are, um,
a lot of silos sitting in this space,
and I just want to encourage you to look at those silos
and to think about how they are all connected.
Unless there is a better appreciation of that in a time
of crisis, we won't learn the lessons that we need to,
and we will repeat the same mistakes
because I hate to say it,
we have been repeating the same mistakes for a long time,
and particularly in the area of recovery as well.
Of the others who died on February the 22nd, more than half
of them were killed by falling unreinforced masonry.
It wasn't tied back or it wasn't cordon properly, excuse me,
after the 4th of September earthquake, the first people
who died in the Hawke's Bay earthquake, February the third,
1931, almost 80 years to the day were killed
by falling masonry.
Why don't we learn the lessons of our experiences?
And I wanted to grab your attention with that statement,
because I only have five minutes,
and as you'll see from my submission, I support the changes
that are being made in the bill.
But I but don't think for a minute
that this is world leading.
And it could be, we really could step up here
if we don't have a process in place
to learn the lessons from our previous experiences.
If there is not a requirement
for a fully independent inquiry that does not have the terms
of written terms of reference written by those
who are being, um, scrutinized, if there is no obligation
to embed any lessons learned into future practice,
if there is no centralized repository
of the rec recommendations, we will continue.
Uh, to repeat the same states time
and time again, I've rec recommended
the independent general emergency, I'm sorry,
inspector General of emergency management, uh,
management approach, um, that has been adopted in a couple
of the states and in Australia.
And I know that, uh, one of the first, I think, um, uh,
independent inspector generals rather, um, he has,
I believe, made a submission to this committee as well.
Um, or,
and as I've actually written
to the Prime Minister about this,
because it was an idea that was brought
to my attention when I wrote a column for, for, um,
about it on newsroom, um, that a standing commission
of inquiry into adverse offense, uh, be set up.
And I guess I'm gonna run out of time,
so I'm just gonna say there are four s in this act.
Um, it covers two of them, readiness and response.
It does not cover risk reduction in a meaningful way,
and it doesn't recover recovery.
Major disasters will, um,
requiring an emergency response will always
be followed by a recovery.
So why aren't we better prepared?
And in terms of risk reduction,
it's been 15 years since the Canterbury earthquake sequence.
What, so why are we still discussing taking people
out of harm's way?
Um, sometimes referred to, um, as managed retreat
in terms of recovery, we need people prepared to go in
and to support straight away so
that the emergency operation center can stay focused
on response.
But recovery, the recovery function operates in parallel.
So it's got to get underway straight away.
And, uh, that's where you need external expertise to come in
and support, but with sufficient knowledge
and experience to be able to work, um, very collaboratively,
um, across the particular region that they might begin.
So I'm afraid of running out of time, so I'll stop there.
Thank you so much. And I'd have a good look at your
submission, uh, yesterday.
And, um, just a one quick question, um, if you have time,
is the, uh, ideas around having a standing review is,
I mean, that's, I take your point around the, the nature
of the act and the fact it's, um, not going as far as, um,
it would need to go to address some of the concerns
that you've raised, but that having a standing review
or having a more automatic review function is something
that we could potentially look at as an amendment to this,
um, bill as it's drafted at the moment.
Is that your view?
I think that, I think you should, um,
I think you should look at it,
and even if it were not possible to be addressed, uh,
um, in this bill, um, a recommendation that, uh,
some detailed analysis of the, um, approach
that's been adopted in Australia, you know, I mean, I,
I'd rather that things were done well rather than quickly.
It has been 15 years.
We haven't, uh, learned the lessons
of our experience in in Christchurch.
Um, I would be happy to provide you
with some supplementary information on
that particular issue, if that would,
it would, if it would assist
That, that would be excellent.
And, uh, yeah, sorry for the short amount of time, um,
that we have with you today.
Uh, but that would, that would be really helpful.
And thanks also, Leanne, for, um, uh,
mentioning the Ann 15 year anniversary
and the 185 people that were lost in Christchurch.
I think that's, um, uh, something that's really important
for the committee to have in mind
when we are considering this bill.
So thank you so much for your
submission and for your time today.
Thank you very much. Thank
You.
All right. We now have, uh,
prudence Walker from the Human Rights Commission.
Levi is with us,
or, or Francis
Kilda Kilda Prudent.
Welcome. Thank you for joining us. Thank you.
We've got a copy of your submission in 10 minutes
to hear from you, so I'll leave it over to you and,
and your team for your submission. Awesome.
Thank you. Thank you for this opportunity
to expand on our, uh, written submission.
If we want an emergency management system
that can be relied on
and that we know will take care
of everyone in our communities.
This bill needs to mandate for iwi involvement,
disabled people's involvement and accessibility standards.
We support the progress the bill makes towards this
through improved governance
of the emergency management system through recognition
of the vital role played by Iwi Hapu Marai,
and through recognition
of disproportionate impact on some
communities in times of crisis.
However, this recognition needs to be matched
with formalized authority for decision making, giving effect
to the rights of participation
and appropriate resourcing for the system
to facilitate us all working together for the common good.
We cannot rely on discretionary involvement of iwi, Maori,
or disproportionately affected communities.
Discretionary involvement is neither effective
nor meets Titi or Waitangi or human rights standards.
This bill sets the foundation for any legislation
or regulations, so must embed Titi and Human Rights.
Unambiguously active involvement of iwi Maori as
to Titi partners needs to be clearly stated
and the purpose of the bill,
and in all clauses related to the composition
of governance structures and planning
and decision making bodies such as
emergency management committees.
Alongside these provisions, requisite resourcing
for participation and the essential infrastructure
provided needs to be included in the bill.
The vital role that Iwi
and Hapu play across the four Rs is reflected in the many
reports informing this legislation
and has again, been acknowledged
by responsible ministers in statements about
recent weather events.
So it is a significant emission that the bill fails
to explicitly recognize or to embed, uh,
or to embed practical application
of self-determination or partnerships.
We support the submission of the Iwis Forum
and commend that to you as a guide for
how relevant clauses could be articulated throughout the
bill, within the broad mandate of Te Kahui Tangata
to promote, protect, and advocate respect for human rights
and the human rights dimensions of Titi.
My role as Disability Rights Commissioner gives specific
attention to the rights of disabled people.
Disabled people are demonstrably one
of the communities disproportionately
affected in emergencies.
That disproportionate impact arises in large part from being
invisible, disregarded,
or prevented from participating in preparation.
So to improve the design
and responsiveness of the system,
disabled people must be made visible
and explicitly named in the legislation
with expanded guidance about who disproportionately
effective communities refers to, along with other groups
that we've specified in our submission.
From my recent discussions
with local government, this is guidance.
I think responsible bodies would welcome to ensure
that disproportionate impact is mitigated.
The bill must require emergency management committees
to actively include disabled people
and their representative organizations alongside other
disproportionately affected communities.
Lack of engagement
by emergency management bodies is a consistent theme I hear
in many of my conversations with disabled people
and Tang Maori.
And for the latter, this can be both as Maori
and as disabled people, I acknowledge that there are pockets
of good practice for engagement with disabled people
and access to information, but this is a only in pockets,
and b, focused largely on personal preparedness.
This bill needs to strengthen system preparedness.
The bill needs to provide a system lever requiring emergency
management committees
and first responders to consistently plan with
and for disabled people.
There needs to be a very well oiled machine
to operate effectively in the disruptions of an emergency.
It takes time to build that, to build strategic
and trusting relationships with disabled people
to understand and plan for inclusive
and accessible processes, information
and communication channels.
We have seen increased capacity, the increased system
capacity for accessible information and alternate formats,
but without a clear mandate experience shows that priority
or resource will not be directed to maintaining initiatives
and relationships that arise immediately after emergencies.
Participation is not a privilege, it is a right
and the processes that will facilitate that need
to be embedded and resourced at a systems level,
we welcome the recognition of barriers
and for some communi, for some communities,
and recognize that the emergency management system
may not be able to solve all of the barriers,
disabled peace people in Tang, Maori face, such
as material hardship.
But to effectively mitigate their impact and emergencies
and to uphold human rights standards, all legislative policy
and investment levers must be deployed to reduce barriers.
I do want to leave time for any questions you have.
So I will conclude by reiterating that the best way
to mitigate risk and ensure we have a robust
and resilient system is to embed Titi.
The most effective way to achieve this is
to explicitly include the rights of governance
and participation of iwi in the bills provisions
for planning and designing emergency management systems with
UA and communities.
We will all benefit if the diverse experiences, knowledge,
generosity, and intergenerational thinking of UA
and community, become the recognized foundation
of our emergency management system.
And that must include disabled people.
Thank you so much. We do have a
a little bit of time for questions.
I just had a question around, um, the best way
for local communities to be aware of the needs
of this disabled community.
So, um, what would your advice be around that?
Would, would it be, um, that, how, how would it,
I think most of these emergencies that we have, uh,
addressed on quite a local level.
And so, uh, how would that engagement happen so that
disabled members of the public feel confident
that people know what their needs are
and also that there's a, a appropriate dialogue.
Um, so if an emergency did happen, they'd be able
to receive the appropriate assistance.
I think it's at every level, um,
that disabled people need to be involved.
So recognizing, uh, the role of local authorities
and local, um, communities, um,
but also, uh, at every level of the system, we need
to create space for that.
Um, so in terms of engagement at local levels, um,
there has to be connection in local communities.
Um, but the infrastructure
and support at a national level would be a good start.
Um, and, uh, also to look
to disabled persons organizations, um, for
the first points of contact around that.
Fantastic. Thank you so much.
Thanks, uh, for both joining us today
and for your, for your submission.
We'll definitely make sure that we raise, um, those, uh,
issues that you have, uh, raised with us
with officials afterwards.
Thank you so much, Kiara. Kiara, right.
Our next submitter is Environment. Southland,
welcome to unmute yourself.
Welcome. Thank you so much for joining us today
on the Emergency Management Bill.
Uh, we've received your written submission.
We've got 10 minutes to hear from you,
and if you want to leave time for questions at the end, um,
you may, uh, hand over to you, Kira. Yeah,
No, thank you. And I'm hoping you're
hearing me clearly.
Um, Kira Coto, I'm Phil Morrison, deputy Chair
of Environment South, and I'm joined
by our chief executive Rob Phillips
and, uh, general Manager integrated catchment management,
Lucy Hicks, who has significant experience
as an emergency management controller.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today on behalf
of Environment Southland,
about the emergency management Bill.
And I wish to acknowledge and thank you
for your collaborative mahi on
what is a strategically important bill for regions such as,
uh, Southland Emergency Management in Southland is hosted
by Environment Southland as a shared regional model
with four councils jointly responsible
and supported by MANA Emergency Services
and community stakeholders on an increasingly regular basis.
Our region deals with slow developing flood related
and climate driven emergencies.
In this context, the bill is an important step forward,
and we support its general intent.
However, there are several changes we believe are needed
to ensure the legislation works well in practice,
delivering on that intent, uh, relating
to essential infrastructure, we are asking
that the bill clearly recognizes flood protection networks,
including flood banks, as essential infrastructure
for Southland Flood Banks, uh, fundamental assets
with a critical role in emergencies.
They protect life, property access, economic activity,
and essential lifelines across rural communities,
towns, and our city.
As drafted. The definition
of essential infrastructure in Clause seven
does not explicitly include them.
We recommending, uh, amending clause seven
or the associated schedule so
that flood protection networks are expressly recognized
as essential infrastructure.
This would align the bill with the national policy statement
for infrastructure and give councils clearer authority
and consistency when maintaining
or appearing these assets during emergencies and recovery.
For example, during the September, 2023,
flooding gore in Gore,
rising Rivers put pressure on key transport routes led
to evacuations and exposed gaps in communication
and declaration processes, highlighting
how essential well maintained flood protection
infrastructure is for keeping our communities connected
and for reducing wider disruption.
With regard to group, office
and group manager roles as drafted,
clause 38 2 currently describes group offices
as providing administrative and related services,
and we feel that description does not reflect the reality
of modern emergency management.
Our group office provides hazard intelligence planning
readiness activities, coordinated multi-agency work,
community engagement, and iwi partnership support.
And these are specialist professional functions
that enable the emergency management system
to operate effectively.
Therefore, we recommend amending Clause 38 2, so
that the group officers are recognized
for their professional and technical functions,
and that national guidance be developed
to clarify their role responsibilities
and minimum capability expectations.
This will ensure national consistency
and support the increasing demands created
by climate driven hazards for iwi
and Maori participation.
We believe the bill needs stronger wording
around iwi partnership.
Clause 39 2 F refers
to appointing individuals who reflect local perspectives
of Maori, and we feel that phrase is too broad
and risks enabling representation
that actually does not reflect UA authority.
Recent emergencies have shown how vital Iwi involvement is
for welfare support, local response
and informed decision making.
A clear example of this is the Oua
tuna wetlands fire in 2022, where AKA
Oua worked closely with emergency services and they
provided place-based cultural
and environmental knowledge to support the response
demonstrating the importance of UA involvement.
So we recommend amending Clause 39 2 F so
that representation is grounded in UA authority.
We also recommend that the bill recognize the critical role
Marai play during emergencies
and include clearer expectations for the protection
of Tonga Maori.
For early planning
that supports culturally appropriate responses, uh,
we are keen to see more recognition for developing
emergencies in Southland.
Many emergencies begin slowly whether patterns build rivers
rise, access roots become vulnerable, and communities
and agencies begin to take action
before a declaration occurs.
While the bill provides clarity for declared emergency,
it provides limited guidance for this important early stage
councils can face uncertain thresholds for activation,
unclear liability risks, and a lack of clarity.
For community volunteers
and partner agencies who often need to act early to reduce
emerging risks, we recommend clarifying expectations
for early pre declaration coordination,
providing liability protection for councils
and volunteers, acting in good faith
and offering guidance on
how early stage actions should be resourced or funded.
Clearer direction will support more timely
and consistent national practice, especially
for slow onset events.
And this will help reduce overall response
and recovery recovery costs
by enabling better coordinated action.
So we're seeking to be proactive without being alarmist.
Implementation and resourcing will be critical.
The bill creates significant new responsibilities,
including strengthened iwi partnership, expanded planning
and readiness duties,
and increased expectations for coordination
and community engagement.
Emergency management is currently funded almost entirely
by local government, and these new demands would place an
untenable burden on councils,
especially a future constraints on council
revenue are introduced.
We recommend including a provision
that ensures central government funding for the additional
responsibilities created by the bill, supported
by clear national guidance and staged implementation.
Without sustainable funding, the objectives
of the bill are unlikely to be achieved.
In closing, we to summarize, we support the intent
of the bill and ask the committee
to consider these five refinements.
One, explicitly recognizing flood protection networks
as in essential infrastructure.
Two, strengthening the role
and capability expectations
of group officers and group managers.
Three, grounding iwi representation in UA authority,
and recognizing the role of marai
and protection of Tom La Maori.
Four, providing clearer guidance for managing,
developing emergencies prior to a declared emergency.
And five, establishing a sustainable national funding
pathway for the expanded responsibilities in the bill.
These refinements would ensure legislation reflects the
operational realities we face
and strengthen the emergency management system
for the communities we serve.
Nai uh, thank you for the opportunity to present today
and the team are happy to respond
to any questions you may have.
Thank you. Uh, thanks so much for that, um, submission
and, um, it was great to be able to see, um,
how effective the operation was, um, uh,
during the last emergency that was, that was down there,
that seemed to be handled really well.
Uh, Francisco,
Uh, thank you chair. Um, couple
of questions around the resourcing issue.
The first is that, uh,
can you confirm my understanding on whether the rates cap
legislation exude, uh, includes carve outs for, um,
emergency management activities for council?
Are they exempted from the rate cap legislation?
That's my first question, is the second question is,
is there an estimate of how much, um,
how many additional costs specifically
that environmental Southland will have to, uh, incur
because of this, um, additional responsibilities?
I know that the risk suggests
that it's something like $83.5 million of costs nationwide,
but, um, of that, how, like,
how much would environment is that environment?
Southland, thank you.
Yeah, thank you. Um, in response to the first question,
we, we do not know yet if there is, uh,
if there is provision there.
And in the second one, I believe that we have not yet, uh,
committed to calculating the specific costs of
that we would incur, um, as depending on the shape
of the new bill of the new act.
Thank you so much. Uh, we have, uh, now, uh, used all, all
of our time, so thank you so much for joining us
and we really appreciate the,
especially the detailed recommendations you have on the bill
that's, um, super helpful as well.
So appreciate that work. Thank you. Pleasure. Thank you.
Thank you so much. Uh, we now have HU community
and I understand we've got Katie and Patrick joining us.
Welcome.
Uh, we have 10 minutes, uh, to hear from, uh, you.
We'll leave it to you, uh, to decide, um, who's speaking.
And, uh, if you want to leave time for questions at the end,
uh, you may over to you,
Over to you, Katie.
Um, it's a real pleasure to be, um, with you today
and to be submitting, um, our all, um, opportunity,
um, with you this morning on this bill.
Thank you for that. 17 member organizations
of the community Constellation that
who year convene have made this submission to you today.
They are peak bodies from across the sector
and capability building organizations all saying the same
thing, um, to you this morning.
The recent flooding and landslide events, as we all know,
have demonstrated the critical role that the Tua, um,
community, um,
and voluntary sector play in emergency response
and recovery often before government arrive
and certainly long after they leave.
These events have reinforced the urgency of ensuring
that community voices knowledge
and resources are formally recognized
and adequately resourced within New
Zealand's emergency management system.
So our submission makes a number of recommendations
that are about investing in community infrastructure
to enable this to be a framework for resilience,
response and recovery, not just rescue.
These include embedding community
and volunteer expertise in emergency management governance,
con continuity planning for essential community services
and developing community resilience metrics.
So this bill establishes a framework
for emergency management functions and accountability,
but it doesn't establish funding streams for UA
and community organizations to prepare for emergencies
or to respond when they occur.
Community resilience comes from being community led,
community rooted, not just from external agency
coordination alone.
Over to you Patrick.
Um, just with regards to, uh, the ability for Maori to,
uh, respond to crisis
and emergency, um,
unfortunately Maori know this all too well, um,
is deeply rooted in having to plan for leadership loss.
And we've seen that with the loss of the Maori king
and also Ari Kiwi, where, uh, a whole bunch
of people had to drop tools and respond to a, to a crisis.
So, uh, grief, confusion, community disintegration,
and then they have to go and seek, uh, resources
to host the hundreds of people without literally no notice,
uh, to continue to provide, uh, community cohesion, uh,
and also having to adhere to adhere
to their cultural convention of man.
So providing assistance to perform, perform their duty
of care, their cultural duty of care to those
who re require it nonetheless.
So, uh, I've seen it all too.
Well, I'm based in the north,
and so those marai, uh, on the LA coastline Nazi had
to respond to, uh, the needs of the community
and adhere to their cultural convention.
So ideally, uh, our key recommendations outline, uh,
what we're looking to, uh, to advocate for, uh,
and typically, um, those are, uh,
among other things is having to connect to comm
to our communities and our Maori communities.
Uh, happy to take any questions if there are any
Ua Thank you very much, uh, for your submission.
And we do have some time for questions
if, if members have any.
I just had a question around, um, the Iwi Maori, uh, points
that you had raised in your submission.
This is something that has come up a lot in
other submissions as well.
Uh, you, you'll see in the act there is, um, provision for,
uh, representatives
to be appointed onto the management group.
Do you think that that is, um,
sufficient from your purposes?
And if not, what would you see?
And I know you've got, um, really amazing written submission
where you've gone through some of this,
but what would be the key, um, barriers from, uh, that,
or would you, would you like to see that?
In what key way would you like to see that extended?
Katie, do you have any view on that?
Yeah, I'm very happy to start there.
So what we are really advocating for is,
and the current, um, bill as it stands, there is no national
ability for, for iwi hapu to come together
and advise the minister and officials, uh,
and be engaged around
what does it look like at the national level.
So essentially what you're doing is providing these token,
um, positions on local committees, um,
without actually engaging, um, UA
and ua, um, in the way that is provided for under Titi.
So it could be that we have the local committees, um,
involvement there, but there's another layer on top of
that which would, um, provide more cohesive
leadership across the country
And strategic conversations and ability for,
For that to take place.
Fantastic. Thank you.
I can't see any questions from any other, uh,
members at this stage, but, um, I know you've got a,
a really detailed Russian submission, so thank you
for providing that, and thanks for joining us today
as well, Gilda.
Right, I understand.
We have Danielle from the Dunedin City Council with us
welcome, Danielle,
And I've got Mike Costello with me,
who's our general manager
and one of our emergency management
controllers at an executive.
Fantastic. We can hear you, but we can't see you.
Um, so just letting you know that,
but happy to, to just hear from you, um, orally,
if that's what you prefer.
Um, and we've got 10 minutes to hear from you,
and we have already received a copy
of your Russian submission, so thank you
so much. Over to you. Thank you.
Hopefully the video will come on soon.
Sure. Um, uh, thank you for the, uh, opportunity to speak
to the submission on the emergency management bill.
Um, we are appear and that our capacity is civil defense
and emergency management controller for the city of Dunedin,
and as a partner in the management
and implementation of Otago CDM group plan 2018
to two eight, along with the Otago Regional Council
and other local authorities in Otago, um, council notes
that its partnership role
with other local authorities in the group plan becomes
auditable, enforceable under the proposed changes
and seeks clarity around the statutory expectations of this.
We note the proposals in the bill materially change the
expectations of council's chief executives
and governance arrangements, and seeks clarifications on
how these arrangements will be designed
and implemented in practice.
The DCC is concerned
that there will be an estimated 82.8 million in additional
costs for local government over four years if the proposed
changes are enacted,
which are largely unfunded in the modeling
for the bill council, seek more information on
how these additional costs will be reconciled, particularly
as the bill is open for consultation.
At the same time as rates capping options
for local councils are being muted by central government,
along with amendments to natural environment planning
and public works legislation
that will affect local authorities.
The DCC also notes that the bill is open
for submissions at the same time
as the simplifying local government consultation
that seeks clarification on how enactment
of new emergency management requirements at regional
and local level will be reconciled with any changes
to regional council governance
and management, particularly
as the bill proposes new statutory requirements in regards
to the regional group plan.
The DCC also seeks clarification on
how councils will be supported by central government
to implement the proposed changes in the bill, including
how the new requirements are monitored and evaluated,
and any potential re
repercussions for councils if expected are not met.
Uh, the DCC supports the acknowledgement in the bill
that the hardest effect
of natural disasters is on our most vulnerable communities,
and also supports the requirement
for the emergency management leadership,
the director general of emergency management,
and the emergency management committees to directly engage
with representatives from these specific communities.
We also support the community engagement aspects outlined in
section 94 of Bill that requests further detail of
how emergency plans will be excluded in practice
and how the noncompliance part
of the legislation will be enforced.
So thanks for the opportunity to present.
Thank you. Uh, that was, that was great. Um, very concise.
We have got a copy of your written submission,
but I just wanted to pick up on one of the issues
that you raised in there, which is around resourcing,
uh, which has come up a number of times from,
from other s submitters as well.
So from your reading of the bill, um,
what additional support do you think, uh,
your council would need to be able
to kind of fully implement that?
And, uh, where, where would this, um,
where is this gonna come from if it's within the existing
funding that you have available?
So, so I think one of the things around, uh,
the resourcing is, is probably the,
the requirement on the CCEO to have the, um,
staffing more readily
or more staffing available for natural emergencies.
Um, currently we're doing it with rostered
with our existing staff, and so we're, we're not certain
what the implication might be in terms of
that additional resourcing yet.
Um, so I think we are looking
for the greater clarity in terms of how that might play out.
Thank you. Uh, Francisco.
Uh, thank you chair. My question is along the same lines,
um, that you're proceeding chair.
Um, my question is around the transitional, uh,
supports you've called for in paragraph 38.
Um, what exactly does that look like?
Do you mean like funding?
Um, and in terms of extending timelines to the, um,
to the provisions in the bill?
Like what do you feel are more sort of realistic timeframes
in their transition timelines?
Thank you.
So There, did you hear that? Sorry.
Yeah, yeah, I did. I'm just
in my head quickly trying to formulate a response.
No worries. We can't see you.
So that's, we're just waiting Sure. That you're
Technical difficulties.
No, no worries at all. Be lovely
that you can't see us, actually.
Um, just one of the,
um, I I think probably we were just looking for,
for a longer period in terms of that transition so that,
that, um, because there is a lot going on in council space
at the moment around the, um,
the changes that we're we're facing.
So it's just looking at that, how, how do we,
how do we extend that out a little bit?
Fantastic. Thank you.
Well, we don't appear to have any other questions,
but thank you so much, uh, for your engagement with us
and for joining us today
and for your, uh, oral submission as well.
We appreciate it. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you so much.
We have our, uh, next submitter is Andrea Beard,
who I understand is with us.
Um, yes. Morena
Morina, Andrea, uh, great to hear from you.
We can't see you. That's, that's fine.
Uh, if that's your preference, uh,
but we have received a copy of your written submission
and we do have, uh, five minutes to hear from you,
so I won't take too much more time.
And I'll just hand over to you, KDA.
Oh, there we go. Good Morning. Can see you now.
Um, uh, yes. Hi.
My name is obviously Andrea Beard
and I'm on the committee for Papa Kura Neighborhood Support
and the Papa Kura Community Resilience Network, um,
of which I'm actually the creator of the CRNs Ground Game.
Thank you, um, for the opportunity to speak to you today.
It's much appreciated. And my apologies for the COVID voice.
I am still recovering. Oh, um, yeah.
Um, in this current world
of having such a big massive online presence, the bonds
that can be created in real life are invaluable.
And as much as I'm currently loving Uber Meals
and Uber Eats, I have not yet seen a computer
that can grab a chainsaw to remove a dangerous tree branch
or console, a scared survivor with blankets
and a cup of tea, you're far more likely to help someone
to their feet if you know their face
or their name, it's face to face.
I have had the opportunity
to trial a community resilience model based on
what I was able to achieve in my own street.
I have witnessed neighbors who have lived side by side
over 20 years,
and they're finally meeting for the first time.
Others have been living in fear due to past trauma,
and now feel safe to step outside.
This is a successful model.
It's proven and it works,
but there is so much more potential for this
community organized response.
And emergency units core, the word in itself
expresses the importance of the heart
of a community in action, real time,
ground level information by the people in the heart
and soul of our communities.
Core units being integrated into Auckland emergency
management plans and disaster zone mapping,
giving a clearer picture to disaster
agencies in a more efficient response time
for our emergency services core units with members
of our communities trained in first aid, who can act
as first responders and more if help cannot come.
As we've seen in the past core units, with trained
USA methods and best practices,
equipping our community members with the knowledge
and the skills to step up
and emergencies,
the government inquiry into the 2023 disasters repeatedly
emphasized the importance of a community based model
for disaster preparedness response.
And it showed a lack of conveyance of real-time,
ground level information by establishing
and then formally recognizing community organized response
and emergency units.
The successful model that has been tested
would become a sustainable and long-term solution.
Thank you for listening now. I thank you so much.
Yeah, you're welcome. I'm, I'm open
for any questions you might have.
Thank you. Um, I just wanted to start off
by saying thank you for putting so much time
into your written submission.
It's really detailed
and also to acknowledge, um, my experience, uh,
with emergency management is that so many, uh, there are
so many local heroes and so many local communities
that really do take responsibility for this.
I just wanna acknowledge the work that you've done,
um, in this space.
And I suppose that my question is, is do you feel
that this legislation, um, properly has a space for the type
of work that you do, uh, on a very, very, um,
local level within the community?
Or do you think that, um, that could either be strengthened
in codes of practice or regulations or,
or that there needs to be more recognition in the
primary piece of legislation?
Well, I think that there's a massive amount
of resources in our community that we are not utilizing.
It's an untapped area.
Um, I didn't realize until in my street
that it's only got like 63 houses.
And within that I had 14 trained first aiders.
I had a certain amount of people qualified
with heavy machinery and tools digging.
We had a psychologist.
We, we, we had such a, a huge amount of,
of resources just within a very, very small cold sac.
Um, now, uh, in, in regards to your question is
how do I think this would fit into the legislation?
Is that what you were asking? Yes,
Yes, Yes.
I think that it's, we've already started with a trial.
Um, I think it needs to be recognized in re legislation.
It needs to be created. I think they, they missed that part.
They missed the part of the actual, um, okay,
let's get together and let's actually, um, establish
this, these kinds of, of core units,
so to speak, or these core people in our community
that are social, peppered around, that are trained equipped.
I think if we start equipping our community more, um,
they will be more prepared, resilient, and ready.
I cover the four Rs. Let's do the good council talk.
Let's cover the four Rs.
Fantastic. Thank you so much for the Andrea.
Really appreciate, uh, you joining us today.
That was a really excellent submission. Thank you.
Thank you. Bye.
Thanks. We now have, uh, the, uh,
inner City Wellington Business Association.
We've got reference Steven with us.
Welcome.
Hello everybody. Kiara,
thank you so much for joining us.
We've got a copy of your written submission, uh,
and we've got 10 minutes to hear from you
today. So over to you.
So, um, I'm Reverend Stephen King.
I am one of the priests at, um, St.
Peter's Anglican Church on the corner of Willis
and GNI Street in Wellington, central City.
But I'm presenting here today as the chair
of Inner City Wellington,
which is the inner city Wellington Residence Association.
So our patch, uh, for that association sort
of covers the T area
and Wellington Central, um, the CBD sort
of area down to the railway station.
And we have over 17,000 residents living in
that quite small area.
It's actually one of the largest, um,
sub suburbs, uh, in the city.
Um, most of them live in over,
we have over 125 apartment buildings
in our patch.
Um, upfront in the city.
Wellington supports the intent of this bill.
Uh, we do need to modernize the emergency management,
um, framework.
Um, but, uh, as we is so often the case
for inner city Wellington, we find that the reality
of people who live in multi-unit, um,
high-rise buildings, uh, is just not on the radar of people
who plan legislation like this.
Um, so, um, the reality for many
of our people is that they don't have space
to store emergency supplies.
They don't own cars.
They rely on lifts, they rely on electricity for water
and sewage, um, which is shared.
Of course, if you've ever lived in an apartment,
there is also a relatively high number of people living, uh,
in the inner city, uh, who are older residents or renting
or people with some mobility challenges.
Yet much of the basic premise
of the emergency management system is
assumed standalone houses and garages
and stuff like that in suburbia.
And we are just not, uh, we can't
store the food.
There's no point in giving each one
of our apartment members a bucket
and telling them to go dig a fricking hole.
There's nowhere in Wellington Central
to dig a hole, you know?
So, um, and the idea that we could shelter in place for four
or five days is not possible if you're on the 12th floor
of an apartment building, because you'll have no power,
you'll have no water 'cause you have no power.
And so there is a large number of people
for whom the existing advice just doesn't apply.
And we get that. That's in a city Wellington's job is to try
and advocate for that reality.
Um, so how have we been trying to do that?
Um, in many ways, in similar ways to the previous presenter,
we're trying to build, um, community networks.
And we've been working on a project called Lifeboat
Buildings, um, which is based on the simple idea
that in a major earthquake, um,
apartment buildings won't just be places to shelter in.
They'll need to function as sort of vertical neighborhoods
as union, you know, as that Woman's Street was.
Um, and so we've been trying to build
that within apartments.
Um, again, there's a challenge in this
because, um, apartments are not easy things to access
as, you know, you just can't go knock on the door
and put things in the the mailboxes.
You need a contact. Um,
but the reality is, is this bill needs to recognize
as people are telling you that communities are active
partners, not just passive re recipients of information.
Right. A brochure doesn't solve our problem.
And our real concern is, is if something terrible happens,
natural disaster happens, that
because at the, under the current framework,
apartment buildings are not considered as planning units.
You know, so they're not considered to be vertical streets,
if you like, or, or vertical neighborhoods, um,
because we've just been missed out.
Well, they will just, we will end up with a large number
of displaced people in the inner city who are unable
to shelter in place and who will go to seek help elsewhere.
And it's not just, just
so you think it's not just single unit apartment buildings.
There's about 10 halls of residents, um,
in within 150 meters of 200 meters of where I am right now.
Huge numbers of students living in huge residence
is, it's the same for them.
And I think one of our challenges is, is that
as we form new legislation, we have to allow for the reality
of this, um, intensified, um,
urban living, which is also being supported
by other government legislation in terms
of the urban policy statements
and those kind of things as to where we want people to live.
So that's our main point.
If we had, um, three points, we'd say
that community involvement must be explicit
and mandatory, not implied.
Um, as your last speaker said, it's communities
who hold the local knowledge about who has got
what abilities and
what the vulnerabilities are in local communities.
Uh, second, it needs, uh, we believe this bill needs
to explicitly recognize that apartment buildings
and high density housing are different
and they need to be recognized as specific planning units
for any emergency response.
And thirdly, um, community organiz organizations,
whether they're Regi Register residents, associations,
or other neighborhood groups, um, they need to be, um,
sustained, right?
And, and there needs to be some support
of those organizations to do the work they do
within their communities.
And whether that's, you know, in a high,
in a high-rise building, or whether it's a neighborhood, um,
network group, um, that needs to be supported
because that model of shared supported resilience
is actually what gets communities through following any kind
of, um, disaster.
Um, that is, you have our written submission.
We just wanted to, again, make the note that our inner city
urban dwellers are not.
If you read that stuff from an apartment dwellers, um, uh,
perspective, most of it doesn't make sense.
Most of it is nothing to do with this.
Thank you, you so much. Thank you for your submission
and apologies for saying business association
when it's resident association.
That's alright. Really key key point,
uh, from your submission.
But the, the question I had is, uh,
and I've read the recommendations
that you have in your written submission as well,
which are really helpful and we'll get some advice on those.
But, um, with the, i, I suppose for Wellington
with the Koda earthquake Mm.
Uh, is some of what you've advocated about reflected, um,
in some experiences that some
of those inner city apartment dwell has had at
that time? Mm-hmm.
Yeah, so, so I mean, the interesting thing was
that some of the best buildings in
that Kakuta Earth earthquake, you know, like our,
our newest apartment buildings built
to the highest seismic standard, they, um, performed
two expectation and exceeded expectation to the extent
that the building was re-certified for, um,
re occupancy relatively quickly.
However, the reason why they survive
is they move around a lot.
Mm-hmm. So, while engineering wise, they were resr,
you know, they were, they were fine.
Um, some
of those apartments looked like they'd been put in a tumble
dryer, and so they weren't actually able to be occupied.
And so while the seismic regulations had assisted with,
uh, the resilience of the structure, one, the reality
of it was they were not able to be occupied
because of the interior, uh, damage
that had been had occurred
through the result of the, the shaking.
And also too, for many of those buildings, water
and power took a long time to be reestablished.
And you can't, I mean, you just really can't
lug buckets up 15 slights flights of stairs.
It just didn't actually work.
So those people had to actually, our best,
the best buildings, they weren't able
to live in them for quite a long time.
You know, and, and of course the ones that suffered
structural damage, the same, same deal.
But the reality for us is, is post earthquake, this idea
of sheltering in place is just not possible.
And I always have that awful image of I've done,
if you remember Hurricane Katrina,
when all the people in the inner city of,
they had nowhere to go.
So they decided that there must be help at the stadium,
and they all showed up at the stadium and there wasn't help.
And so one of the things I think is quite easy
for inner city, uh, uh, communities
that could be relatively easy advice is there are only
so many open spaces.
There are only so many places in the, in the city
where people will gather.
So it do, it seems to me
that it would be possible within the planning
to make some assumptions about where tents could be
or where sanitation could be
or where people could go for water.
You know? So there's yeah.
Where wherever you are, there's only so many spaces
that will be safe to go.
And that's where the people naturally, they're gonna go
to those places, you know?
Yeah, I agree. Thank you so much for your submission.
We have, um, now ran out of time,
but I really appreciate that
and we will take up some of those points, uh,
with officials afterwards as well.
Okay. Thank you everyone for the work that you're doing.
Thank you so much. Thank you.
We are just running a bit early,
but I think we do have our next, um, submitter here.
Uh, Karen, Karen Ward. Fantastic. I can see you there.
Thank you for joining us a little bit early.
Um, we'll just see if you can unmute yourself.
Fantastic. We can't see you, uh, that's fine.
If that's your, uh, preference.
So just letting you know that.
And we do, uh, have a copy
of your very detailed written submission.
Thank you so much for that.
Um, and, uh, only five minutes
to hear from you, so I won't waste any time.
I'll hand uh, directly over to you, Kiara,
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
My name is Karen Ward.
I'm an independent researcher
and practitioner with a background in disaster risk
and resilience and lived experience across disability,
health, education, community support, local government,
and emergency affected environments.
I'm here because the gaps this bill is trying to address
and not abstract to me, there are patterns I've seen
and lived alongside for many years.
First, we need clear statutory duties
for more than 25 years.
Inquiry after inquiry has shown that when
responsibilities are vague, practice becomes inconsistent,
and people fall through the cracks.
National consistency isn't optional, it's foundational.
Second, continuity of care
and equity must be explicitly recognized.
We know who is disproportionately harmed when systems fail.
Disabled people, older adults,
medically dependent individuals.
Children, migrants, and others who rely on stable supports.
These are not each cases,
they are core populations whose needs must be built into the
system, not left a chance.
Third, we need structural cross-sector coordination.
Emergency management cannot function in isolation.
It relies on health, disability services, education,
welfare, lifeline, utilities,
and community organizations all being able to work together,
not just in principle, but in practice.
And this is where the bill must act
as both a statutory anchor and a statutory bridge.
The bill needs to anchor the emergency relevant duties
that already exist in other acts
because those duties are inevitably activated
during declared emergencies.
Sudden disasters
and prolonged cascading events at the same time.
It needs statutory bridges mechanisms
that allow emergency management organizations to reach out
and connect with your obligations held by other agencies.
Without these bridges, emos cannot lawfully
or consistently coordinate across sectors
even when the duties already exist elsewhere.
We've seen what happens when these elements are missing.
The North Island severe weather events inquiry showed
medically dependent people left without essential services.
The COVID-19 Royal Commission highlighted disproportionate
impacts on disabled people and older adults,
and the Canterbury Earthquakes,
and Pike River Royal Commissions identified deep failures in
cross-sector coordination.
These are long standing, well-documented systemic issues.
This bill is a rare opportunity to finally address them
by giving the system both the anchor
and the bridges it needs to function.
ENC closing. I support the intent of the bill,
but it strengths will depend on whether statutory duties,
continuity of care, equity,
and cross sector coordination are embedded
clearly and consistently.
We cannot afford another generation
of repeating the same failures.
Thank you for your time and consideration.
I'm happy to ask any questions you may have.
Thank you so much for your, um, submission
and also if your, as I said, very,
very detailed written submission.
I'll just check with members if they have any questions.
No questions from members. I think you must have asked, um,
answered all of them, um, in your detailed submission.
So thank you so much for, for joining us today.
We really appreciate the time
and effort you've put into contributing to this.
Uh, bill, thank you so much.
Thank you, Kira.
Kira. Thank you, uh, members, we are now just going to,
uh, take uh, just a slightly earlier break
and we'll, um, reconvene back at, uh, 10 25.
We'll hopefully hear the um, uh,
at 10 25 7.